hey Brad I was listening to your live
stream today and had a question that I
was hoping you could shut some more
light on so somebody asked you about
trust and how to increase trust in
society and you basically said that it's
the wrong question and that you don't
think trust should be valued among
Partners among people among society and
instead people should have active
explanations about other people and
their partners and I was hoping you
could expand on what active explanation
means
um I've heard David Deutsch
say in other places that we don't have
trust in
the system of science or it's not even
entirely correct to say that we trust
the error correction system of science
but instead we have
um
a positive theory about science and how
it works and the scientific community so
I think both of those active explanation
and positive Theory they probably mean
the same thing but I was hoping you
could um
yeah just expand on what they mean
thanks
it's returning to this idea of trust
versus having an active explanation
what's the difference
why should I say something that
seemingly as cold and callous like don't
trust your partner don't trust your
children don't trust the people you love
that sounds awful what on Earth could I
mean by this
and you're right it's isomorphic with
David Deutsch's idea that you shouldn't
trust scientists either
Sam Harris challenged him on this
during one of their conversations I
think it was their first
and Sam was talking about how when it
comes to experts we need a culture of
expertise you know he's often defending
the authority of experts he speaks in
this way for him it's not a shorthand
for him it is
that person's an expert they got the PhD
in physics therefore believe what they
say trust them more than trust someone
else
this is misleading
it's especially egregious from someone
like Sam who spends his life criticizing
faith
Faith being the idea that one is to
believe in a certain series of Dogma or
tenants
or any kind of supernatural phenomena
based upon
no evidence or explanation
explanation most importantly
but rather
a blind willingness to Simply believe in
the face of counter evidence and better
explanations
that's what faith is
and to me trust is just a synonym for
that trust is just a synonym for believe
in the face of counter-evidence
believe believe believe
regardless of whether or not you have a
good explanation
it sounds virtuous doesn't it
after all
trust your parents trust your brother
let's say
trust your brother with your life
I don't need an explanation I just know
that my brother is going to be someone I
can rely on I trust him
I trust him with my children I trust him
with my money I trust him in order to
drive me from point A to point B safely
I trust him
well okay you can talk in those terms
and you do you to some extent
but I think there's a better way to be
you can keep all of that good stuff that
virtuous stuff the love you have for
your brother or whoever it happens to be
that they are someone who is reliable in
getting you from point A to point B
there is someone who is not going to
take your money and waste it or abuse
your generosity they are somebody who
will look after your children
and you don't have to worry you can keep
all of that and eviscerate trust from
your life
by making a simple move a simple
epistemological move that works in terms
of trusting scientists never mind that
and
any other time that you have this
so-called Trust
I remember towards the end of high
school
I had this wonderful School principal
estan was Mr Roberts is a he was a
brilliant guy
I was great friends with him
and as a student I was great friends
with him you know we just got on Well
we'd have great philosophical
discussions and at this time I was still
a Catholic I was still a Christian and I
just took on board what the school told
me
I wasn't a rebel at school I just did
what I was told I was a good boy
he was a man I respected and looked up
to so when I got to University I really
started questioning everything
questioning Faith questioning my
religion I went back to Mr Roberts
and I asked her about the existence of
God and everything I've been taught in
Catholicism
and he had this wonderful retort to
which at that point I didn't have a
counter argument I do now but his
counter argument was this
and I know I'm taking a long time to get
to answering your question but just bear
with me
he said to me well faith is a common
thing
you may not feel as though you have
faith in God and you may question things
but hey think about now where we are
we're sitting in his office
you have faith that the ceiling isn't
going to fall down in upon you right now
that's faith
you don't understand why but you know
it's not going to happen
you just believe that it's not going to
you're walking around with faith all the
time every time you cross a bridge you
have faith that it's not going to
collapse beneath you
and in short that was the argument and
at that time I didn't have a way of
refuting him it sounded reasonable
I can't say I was persuaded I still had
this inexplicit feeling as I would call
it now which is a warning sign
this uncomfortable sense that I was
having the wool pulled over my eyes I
wasn't completely persuaded and I was
right not to be and now what would I say
it's not a matter of faith when I'm
inside a building thinking that the
ceiling isn't going to fall in on me
it's not a matter of Faith each time I
cross a bridge that it's not going to
collapse but rather
I have an active explanation
this is not about support
that dreaded anti-popyrian idea the
support of the evidence but rather an
active explanation a good explanation
about what's going on
if you keep questioning me but why but
why but why like the five-year-old child
I will get to a point where I'll say I
don't know but that doesn't change the
fact that I can give you an account of
why the ceiling won't collapse on me I
understand enough about material science
and chemistry
the way in which
walls hold up roofs
I've got a good enough explanation of
how bridges suspend themselves
all of this stuff is an active
explanation it has nothing to do with
faith or trust or belief
I know
I know means I have an explanation of
if it's good enough there in science and
in understanding why roofs don't
collapse on me and why Bridges don't
collapse when I walk over them if that's
not a matter of trust then it's also not
a matter of trust
when it comes to something like should I
trust a scientist should I trust the
physicist that thing that Sam Harris is
always going on about do we need to have
a culture of trust in the authority of
experts it's not that
I no more have trust in the authority of
experts than I have trust
in the laws of general relativity
in evolution by natural selection
in the Arrhenius theory of acids and
bases name your scientific explanation
that I can give you I don't have trust
in it I understand it and so I know it
and I know it works and it's a good
account of the world
at no point during my explanations of
anything
do I need to talk about belief trust or
faith
and so too with things I don't
understand
things the
particle physicist is claiming about
particle physics that might be Beyond
my present level of understanding or the
molecular biologist might be saying
about genetics
or name your scientists to say I'm not
trusting them
instead I have an active explanation
what is that active explanation
by active explanation I mean I can give
you an account on the spot of what I'm
talking about when it comes to my theory
about how they came to their theories
let's stick with astrophysics and area I
do know about but there are parts of
astrophysics that I don't know about
that are Beyond me but hey I know the
culture of astrophysics I know what
astrophysicists do I know the systems in
astrophysics
I know about peer review but never mind
that I know the fact that there is this
community of astrophysicists where if
any astrophysics in the community puts
forward a theory all the rest of them
try and shoot it down
does this mean you never get new good
ideas no far from it
this process of trying to shoot it down
fails sometimes and good theories get
through does it mean sometimes good
theories get suppressed yes
but
I also have an explanation
that
there's not a culture of complete
irrationality in astrophysics
that eventually
the best theories do end up garnering
support because people also in science
not only want to shoot down the newcomer
they also want to support the newcomer
and they want to also be first in trying
to explain something revolutionary so
there's that at work there's two
competing impulses
all all this together is an explanation
of how astrophysics comes to
the knowledge that it does this error
correcting mechanism in astrophysics
extend that more broadly to physics I
know that it works there
extend it more broadly to the physical
sciences I know it works there extend it
more broadly to the entire Machinery of
Science and what we have in science
therefore is an error correcting machine
all of that is the active explanation of
why
I no longer need to rely upon trust or
belief or faith in scientists I have an
explanation of how this system works
and that the expert
is part of this great system and
community
which together collaborating
means that what they say
has come from not a place of faith and
trust and belief and irrationality
themselves but rather from
a
for want of another word
web or Bedrock of good explanations that
it coheres with this entire system
I personally understand something about
that system
and everyone should no one should need
to
now perhaps if you don't have the
understanding of epistemology and
philosophy of science that maybe I do or
science that I do then maybe you can
have an understanding of me or people
like me but hey Brit Hall is someone who
has a good BS detector
or David Deutsch does one of our River
Campus or Arjun kamani does and so
people who know us know that hey we're
not the kind of people who are going to
just fall for anything we have good
explanations of how these other good
explanations work
and so that those people have a good
explanation of us they don't need to
trust us they have an explanation of how
it is that we come to the conclusions we
do and so it's this big web of error
correction
you could call all of that trust but I
just think that's misleading because
trust again like faith
is kind of saying give up your critical
faculties you don't have to think for
yourself you don't have to have these
active explanations you can just
sit back relax and think that everyone
else is just producing the goods all the
time no you need to be always be
critical skeptical even that what's
going on out there could be going wrong
and I always think that what could be
going wrong here what could be going
wrong there is this person trying to
pull the wool over my eyes is this
person a crank even within the fields of
science that I understand especially
within the fields of science I
understand
so if it's an astrophysicist or a
geophysicist or any other kind of
physicist or any other kind of scientist
who comes with this brand new Theory I'm
critical very critical to begin with
and I watch to see what the other
members of the community are saying and
I listen
and I go ah okay so this person I
respect is saying that here are the
flaws X Y and Z there's been no answer
to those
red flag
the person watching me can go aha okay
Brett Hall has said that this expert is
claiming one thing but all the other
experts are claiming another thing and
the expert that's claiming the weird new
thing doesn't have answers for all the
other experts he's saying this and I
know that Brett Hall is a person that
doesn't tolerate BS ah so then I can
conclude that this newcomer might not be
telling the truth might be a crank
okay so let's return now to your
original question and I think the
listener will be able to figure out
exactly what I'm going to say now
because it it's all part of the same set
of ideas the same epistemology
and you might think but hold on this is
unfair this is unfair to Port all of
that cold hard rationality into a world
of emotion and love and compassion that
exists between
and within families and among friends
shouldn't you still trust your family
and friends how dare you try and bring
in this cold rational discussion of what
goes on in science and epistemology into
this realm of love where you should have
trust
again I say no
if it devalues the entire process of
science to say that you trust in the
experts or you trust in the theory
it devalues the relationships you have
to say that it's nothing but trust I
just trust the people that I love I just
trust my brother
that devalues my brother and the
relationship I have with him
to say that I don't need to think at all
about this I do think about my brother
and it's good that I do it's good that I
think about the people I love and think
about the relationships carefully that I
have
it doesn't mean that I'm
I become concerned about them it doesn't
mean that I become super critical or
skeptical about my relationships with
them no it's the opposite
the more I think about them the better
the stronger the harder to vary the
explanation becomes about the fact that
what you're calling Trust
I call a deeper understanding of the
love I have for my brother for example
and the fact that I know that he's going
to be good with you know financial
matters he's going to be good with
people I care about he's going to be
good with relationships that I have with
him he's going to be good with anything
that I would want to rely upon him for
because I have a good explanation
of him of my brother of what he's like
his personality I understand him because
I've taken time to know him
because there could come a time in
personal relationships where you go
well
he's Behaving Badly he's done the wrong
thing he's repeatedly done the wrong
thing and you might say you've lost
trust but I would say I now have a
different understanding of him I have a
good explanation that he's not reliable
he's the sort of person that might for
example
drink too much alcohol and I don't
I understand that he's not the kind of
person who can get me from A to B
reliably you might call that trust I say
of an active understanding of what's
going on
and if I was to blindly trust someone in
that situation if I was to blindly say
oh just drive me from here to wherever
we happen to be going despite the fact
you're drunk I trust you
you know you're my brother I trust you
no that would be terrible I have a good
explanation of what happens when he
drinks and he drives my brother doesn't
drink and drive but I have just just an
example
um
but that's the kind of thing that I mean
I have a good explanation because I've
taken time to know him understand him
love him and all that sort of stuff
so I can tell by the way you've asked
the question you've already gotten
you've already figured this out you've
already seen the what David was talking
about when it comes to trust in the
systems of science
it's the wrong question it's the wrong
thing to ask it's the same as trust in
relationships and more broadly as I was
saying in my live stream
how do we increase trust in society was
the question that I was asked and I said
it's the wrong question
because you don't want to increase trust
in society I don't want
people to trust one another in a society
I think that's a terrible
way for society to improve
it's very much like how do we increase
faith in this religious community bad
idea that way lies dogmatism that way
lies fundamentalism that way lies a
blind adherence to a certain
interpretation of scripture
this is what increasing Faith would be
so in precisely the same way
increasing trust in a society
could cause the society to become Static
everyone just thinks that everyone else
is doing the right thing
the more that there is trust people are
becoming less and less critical
that's what trust is about trust is
becoming less critical
and critical is not a bad thing
critical Is Not a Bad Thing critical is
not a bad thing
it has this bad reputation
because you shouldn't criticize a person
you shouldn't say you're a bad person or
think that's a bad person
that's the wrong application of critical
and this is why I say a criticism isn't
just saying you're bad that's not a
criticism a criticism is an explanation
it itself is an explanation of what is
wrong with something and why
so if you're critical of someone in the
papyrian sense it means that you have an
explanation of what's wrong
if I'm critical of my partner or my
brother then what that means is I have
an explanation of what's wrong with them
and you know what
I can be critical of my partner and
brother and all the people that I love
and you know what I do that and I find
the criticisms wanting I find the
criticisms fail
the more critical I am the more I
realize
these are great people that I want in my
life that I love
that's what genuine popular criticism
gets you
it
brings the strongest possible
explanation you have of all the ways in
which this person
has filed all the ways in which this
person has bad ideas all the ways in
which this person
isn't the person for you isn't a good
brother isn't a good partner
and they're wanting they fail
these criticisms are not good enough
when put against
the explanation you have of all the good
reasons why you love them in the first
place
in the same way
that
the theory of general relativity or the
theory of evolution by natural selection
or the theory of how acids and bases
work or the theory of tectonic plates
name your good explanation in science
they stand there themselves as Grand
criticisms of every other competing
Theory
and thus far they've never failed
you can shoot at them the the toughest
criticism you like and they just stand
there and they weather at all because
they're the best explanations we have
I don't know what it would take
to remove any of them because what it
would take is not an observation that
fails to agree with any of these
explanations we've talked about that
before Ad nauseam
but rather a superior explanation
so the theory that I love my brother or
I love my partner or
even love other people in society and
some sort of more nebulous sense but
this is what can happen in a
civilization right you you kind of do
have compassion and love for your
neighbors of a lesser degree and of a
different kind to what you have with
your partner brother
all of those are active theories good
explanations of why it is you love your
brother and your partner
and those servers criticisms of this is
the critical approach those are
criticisms of every competing theory of
a competing idea about why you shouldn't
someone comes to you some nasty person
comes to you shouldn't say nasty person
some person you barely know comes to you
or some friend perhaps comes to you and
says hey your brother is a bad person
for reasons x y and z
but you know that X Y and Z aren't true
you have a better explanation those
criticisms that have been brought forth
you dismiss them
perhaps you don't but in general you can
dismiss them because you know better you
know your brother better
and you love them in the face of these
criticisms in the same way that general
relativity stands there weathering
these observations that people claim
that you know neutrinos are traveling
fast in the speed of light or whatever
it happens to be
you can stand back as a proper critic
and go do you know what I'm sticking
with general relativity you can have
your weird observation over there but I
don't think that observation is correct
I'm going to rely on the good
explanation that general relativity is
correct until such time as someone comes
up with a better explanation of what
those observations that apparently
disagree with that are these faster than
light neutrinos I'm not going to think
that these faster than light neutrinos
are a real thing I'm going to think it's
a bit of a problem for the moment but
until I know better I'm sticking with
general relativity
you come to me and tell me my brother
has lied cheated and stolen
well do you know what I know my brother
better than that
and until such time as you bring to me
something better than these claims
whatever it happens to be even evidence
that you claim you have
until I've heard it from his horse's
mouth
I'm going to stick with him I'm going to
stick with thinking that
I love this guy because I know him
better same as true of my
partner my parents my friends
people that I love
now extend this to all of society now
it's not a matter of trusting
increasing trust in society that's the
wrong metric and that way as I say lies
the degradation and stasis of a society
but rather
having a positive explanation that the
neighbors around you in this
civilization the society that you have
is a place where you want to belong the
question is how do we ensure that the
people around you continue to hold your
values
well you've got to talk to them
you've got to ensure that you're to some
extent involved in the direction that
Society is taking
and if you're not if you're sitting back
going not my business I'm not going to
get involved in this political thing I'm
not going to get involved in these
discussions I'm not going to be involved
in ideology and philosophical debates
I'm going to sit back and meanwhile
Society is decaying around me you're not
doing anything well that's on you
that's your fault if the entire
political system is going the wrong way
and you're not doing anything about it
you're not actively involved in trying
to argue against these bad ideas well
more fool you as the place begins to
crumble around you and yet fair enough
you might want to leave that Society if
you've either done nothing or even if
you've done something but you've failed
in your attempts to keep the society
a place where you'd like to stay
but I say again at no point in all of
that discourse do I have to rely on
trust I just have to talk about I've got
a good explanation of my neighbors and
the way that they are
and I've got a good explanation of my
behavior within that society and what
I'm trying to do to make it better
and it's an active explanation of what
other people are like
and what my role in this Society is
because I want to have an active role an
active explanation so the people I care
about these other people that I love can
also Thrive and succeed in the society
whether it's my local community
more broadly my nation more broadly this
thing we call the West the enlightenment
civilization
and the global civilization more broadly
than that
so let's not increase trust in society
let's rather increase the knowledge that
we have about how to ensure that Society
remains dynamic
and Society can make progress
towards
achieving
ever better
Enlightenment values ever better
technological progress ever faster
improvements in medicine health wealth
and happiness
that would be what I would want to
increase in society
not trust